.TH VELVET 1 "2026-04-01" "velvet" "General Commands Manual"
.SH NAME
velvet \- a scriptable terminal multiplexer
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B vv
.RI [ options ]
.RI [ command ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Velvet
is a fully scriptable terminal multiplexer which draws heavy inspiration from tmux and neovim.
Like tmux, velvet "multiplexes" IO between an arbitrary number of terminal applications in a single terminal session.
Like neovim, velvet supports scripting nearly all behavior through its lua API.

.PP
With no arguments,
.B vv
will start a new server and attach to it.
If a server is already running,
.B vv
will attach to the existing session.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI "\-S, \-\-socket " socket
Specify the socket path instead of the default.
.TP
.B \-h, \-\-help
Show usage information and exit.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B attach
Attach to the server at the specified socket, or guess if omitted.
.TP
.B detach
Detach the current terminal from the session.
.TP
.BI "lua " "[<file>|\-]"
Evaluate
.I <file>
or stdin on the server.
.TP
.B reload
Reload the velvet session, resourcing configs
.TP
.B quit
Quit the velvet session, killing all windows.
.SH CONFIGURATION
.B velvet
will look for a configuration file at 
.B $HOME/.config/velvet/init.lua
at startup. If no configuration file is found, it will source the bundled
default preset. The recommended way to get started is to 
.B require()
a preset at
the top of your own config file, and add your own adjustments.
.SS Config example
.nf
require('velvet.presets.dwm').setup({ prefix = "<C-x>" })
-- your config below
.SS LSP support
The lua API is fully annotated with EmmyLua style doc comments. I recommend
setting up a lua LSP and pointing it to the Velvet lua distribution to get full
autocompletion and inline documentation:
.TP
.B .luarc.json
.nf
{
  "workspace.library": ["<velvet_path>/lua"],
  "runtime": {
    "version": "Lua 5.5"
  }
}
.fi
.PP
.SS Reloading
You can reload your config by pressing
.B <prefix>R,
or programatically by calling
.B vv.api.reload()

Reloading wipes all lua state and loads your config, but windows are preserved.
This is convenient while tinkering with your config; it is almost never necessary to restart Velvet,
and changes are immediately visible.

To selectively preserve state during reload, see
.BR velvet-session-storage (3)
.SH KEYBINDINGS
.B Velvet
supports mapping any key sequence to a lua function. It follows similar syntax and conventions to neovim.
By default, you can view your current keybinds with the shortcut
.B <C-x>h
.SS Example Keybinds
.nf
local map = require('velvet.keymap').set
local spawn = vv.api.window_create_process
.fi
\-\- pressing Ctrl + Shift + F1 will open bash in the 
.B $HOME
directory.
.nf
map("<C-S-F1>",
  function() spawn({"bash"}, { working_directory = os.getenv("HOME") }) end)
.fi
\-\- Pressing Ctrl + X and then C will open
.B $SHELL
in a new window.
.nf
map("<C-x>c", function() spawn(os.getenv("SHELL")) end)
.fi

.SS Modifiers
.B Velvet
supports the following modifiers:
.TP
.B S 
Shift
.TP
.B M
Alt
.TP
.B T
Meta
.br
Velvet treats meta and alt interchangably.
.TP
.B D
Super
.br
Most likely intercepted by your OS or hosting terminal.
.br
Refer to your terminal's documentation to learn how to pass this through.
.TP
.B C
Control
.PP
Note that modifier support depends on the terminal hosting
.B Velvet. Super,
and combining
.B Shift
and
.B Control
requires the hosting terminal to implement the
.I Kitty Keyboard Protocol.
If the protocol is not available, Velvet falls back to basic modifier support.

For detailed information about the keymap module, see
.BR velvet-keymap (3)
.SH LUA MODULES
.B Velvet
includes a number of lua modules by default; some general purpose, and some highly
specific. The most important ones are briefly described here, but each have
more detailed information in dedicated sections.
.TP
.BR velvet-keymap (3)
.B require('velvet.keymap')
.br
Implements a key event handler which intercepts all keyboard input. This is the
recommended way to create keybindings for creating and manipulating windows (or
doing just about anything, really). It has similar key chain semantics to neovim,
including conflict resolution when one or more keybinds prefix each other.

Note that this module is responsible not only for executing keybinds, but also
for forwarding unbound keys to the focused window. If you don't use the default
config, you must either provide an input forwarder, or require velvet.keymap.

Unless you really disagree with the keymap implementation, you always want to include this.
.TP
.BR velvet-dwm (3)
.B require('velvet.dwm')
.br
Implements a tiling window manager with similar semantics to the X11 window
manager by the same name. It hooks into the low level event system and updates
the screen layout as needed. The default config sets up dwm, including keybinds
for manipulating window layout and tags (workspaces).

A window manager is absolutely required to use Velvet. Otherwise windows will
just stack randomly on top of each other. Currently, dwm is the only available
window manager, but a tmux-like window manager is planned in a future release.
.TP
.BR velvet-window (3)
.B require('velvet.window')
.br
Provides windowing abstraction for routing input events to windows, and otherwise manipulate them. This is easier to interface with
than the integer handles returned by the low level API.

You generally want to use this for creating custom UIs.
.TP
.BR velvet-events (3)
.B require('velvet.events')
.br
Allows creating and deleting event listeners. See
.BR velvet-events (3)
for a list of available events.

Also supports emitting and subscribing to custom events provided by other modules.
For example,
.BR velvet-keymap (3)
fires custom events when keymap related information changes, which can be used
to implement functionality similar to the legendary neovim plugin
.B which-key
by Folke.
.TP
.BR velvet-session-storage (3)
.B require('velvet.session_storage') 
.br
Defines a friendly interface for storing named lua tables and serializes them
when a reload event is raised.
.SH SCRIPTING
Since everything is just lua, it is fairly easy to script even moderately complex tasks via shell commands.
Useful patterns include sending code to the server via heredocs or shell redirection:
.TP
.B Heredoc
.nf
-- Close all windows named 'zsh'
vv lua <<LUA
local windows = vv.api.get_windows()
for _, id in ipairs(windows) do
  local title = vv.api.window_get_title(id)
  if title and title:match("^zsh$") then vv.api.window_close(id) end
end
LUA
.fi
.TP
.B Prepared scripts
vv lua myscript.lua
.TP
.B One-off commands
vv lua <(echo 'vv.options.theme.blue = "#0000ff"')
.PP
Note that
.B vv
is a global. It is always in scope, and contains the velvet C API functions,
in addition to some helpful utility functions also found in neovim, such as
.TP
.B vv.inspect()
to convert a table to a readable string,
.TP
.B vv.deep_extend()
to merge tables, useful for passing options to a module setup() function, and
.TP
.B vv.deepcopy()
to clone a table in order to make changes without touching the original.
.TP
.B vv.api.*
to access the low-level API everything else is built around. See
.BR velvet-api (3)
.SH ADVANCED USAGE
The C engine tries to make as few assumptions as possible; in a nutshell, it performs the following tasks:

1. Implements a VT220 compatible emulator, plus modern extensions,
.br
2. Dispatches system IO and timers on an event loop,
.br
3. Raises lua events when something happens (keyboard input, process output, etc.),
.br
4. Composites windows (based on Z index) and draws to the screen when buffer content changes,
.br
5. Provides a socket that clients can connect to.
.br

All other system behavior is defined in lua by interfacing with the low level api in the
.B vv.api
namespace.

For example, the core engine raises an event on key input. If the lua side does
not send that event to a window, it doesn't go anywhere. This makes it possible
to define your own keybind implementation.

As another example, the engine has no notion of a window border; the default
configuration creates borders by spawning four lightweight windows (window
objects with no backing process or pty), and setting their dimensions to [1x42]
and [22x1] to cover a [20x40] window. It then hooks up an event to update the
border positions whenever the attached window is moved or resized, and
registers themselves as child windows of the attached window so they are
automatically destroyed when the parent exits.

All that is to say, the system is extremely flexible and extensible; any task
performed by Velvet can be trivially scripted, such as sending mouse input and
keystrokes to a window.

The related pages attempt to thoroughly document the intended usage of each
provided default module at a high level, but the best way to explore what is
possible is to read the default config and the stock modules:
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR velvet-api (3)
.BR velvet-dwm (3)
.BR velvet-events (3)
.BR velvet-keymap (3)
.BR velvet-session-storage (3)
.BR velvet-window (3)
